# Community Development

This post is intended as more of a philosophical rumination on what makes a community a community, and why communities are so vital to not only the specific work that we do as an open source project, but also to the functioning of emergent properties of individual human interaction like society and culture. If you are looking for active ways to get involved rather than reading the theory behind what we're up to, please join our [slack](http://slack.status.im) and take it from there with all the wonderful people you will find hanging out in the various different channels.

Obviously, from a practical perspective, [tell people](https://wiki.status.im/community/tell-a-friend/) who you know will be interested in this kind of endeavour and technology, demonstrate it to your friends and talk about it with the people you know and interact with on a daily basis. Be open to their criticisms and misunderstandings; every interaction this community has with the wider world is a chance to learn something more about ways to integrate the two and benefit everyone from Status to Ethereum to geeks everywhere and, eventually, the so-called 'normal' people. But, enough practicalities, let's dive deep into the philosophy.

# Community and Language

First, some background and context. I am an English Literature graduate who somehow found himself pulled into the murky crypto waters while completing his studies and finding himself entirely unsatisfied with the narrow scope and focus of most (if not all) academic work. While it is imperative that we hold ourselves to high standards of evidence and proof, as well as rigourous structures for the disclosure of such evidence, it is equally important that we not pigeonhole the knowledge we gain so that it can only ever be useful to people working in the same narrow field as ourselves. I feel quite strongly that a modern version of Descartes might suggest that 'I share, therefore I am.'

This, at the beginning, was the beauty of bitcoin and Ethereum for me - they sit quite literally at the intersection of an almost infinite number of fields of study and, as such, it is not surprising that they have had (and will continue to have) such a marked impact on our lived realities. From cryptography and information security, development and coding, to big banking, finance and investment, economics, game theory, politics, sociology, psychology, linguistics, and literary theory, these new distributed networks have something for everyone. It is at the intersections between so many different fields of knowledge that we have discovered (and will continue to discover) new ways of being and interacting in this vastly complex and fast-paced modern world. It is in the spaces between that the [adjacent possible](http://www.practicallyefficient.com/2010/09/28/the-adjacent-possible.html) hovers most closely above our current world.

For instance, it has been a largely accepted fact in humanistic fields of study for the last few centuries that their exists a large, and largely unbridgeable, gap between what we say and what we do (in technical speak: there exists a lacuna between utterance and action, speech/writing and experience itself). And so we have come up with any number of fancy (largely French) theories for discussing and deconstructing the ways in which we make meaning via language, which is that strange phenomenon that mediates our experience of reality so as to allow us to express said reality. It gets weirder, obviously, because expressing one's experience of the world can alter that world - we say that the two are in constant, mutually-arising, interdependent dialogue with each other. This idea commonly falls under the concept of Ontological Design (to which I will return shortly).

The advantages that computer languages provide over natural language were first brought home to me when watching [Good Copy Bad Copy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ByY6j0qzOyM), a wonderful film about all the various flawed and outdated ways that we currently handle copyright in the digital era. One of the many points that this awesome film makes is that the most important document for the preservation of liberty in our era is no longer The Declaration of Independence (or the Freedom Charter etc), but rather the 50x50 matrix that is the decryption key for blu-ray disks. It's quite a bold claim, but thinking about the implications of the move from natural language to matrices and the programs that produce them, made it suddenly apparent to me that the divide between what we say and what we do simply does not apply in computer programs and the languages we use to write them.

What a program says is exactly what it does. If it does not say it right, or even if the syntax is slightly off (as anyone who has ever forgotten a semi-colon in a javascript file can attest to), the program will not work. It is implementable, testable, actionable, *interactive* language. It is executable text that we can send around the world at the speed of light. We are no longer merely externalising our consciousness with language; we are manipulating it, the world which it describes, AND and other people's consciousness in real time as we transcend distance and other bodily limitations.

So, if normal language allows for a certain kind of ontological design, what new and different ontologies will we be able to produce when focussing on the spaces between fields and the way they interact, using language which has testing and implementation at the heart of its design (as opposed to the ambiguity necessary to express ourselves fully in natural language. Ambiguity is worth a whole post in itself, so I'll leave that as an exercise for the reader)? Before I tackle my own question, let's just use the wonderful Anne-Marie Willis' words to define

> 'ontological designing' - i.e. self-consciously creating different ‘ways of knowing’ -  as “a theory:  
>> * that design is something far more pervasive and profound than is generally recognised by designers, cultural theorists, philosophers or lay persons;  
>> * that designing is fundamental to being human — we design, that is to say, we deliberate, plan and scheme in ways which prefigure our actions and makings — in turn we are designed by our designing and by that which we have designed (i.e., through our interactions with the structural and material specificities of our environments);  
>> * that this adds up to a double movement — we design our world, while our world acts back [...] and designs us.”  

# Consensus and Openness

The reason I have gone into such detail about the nature of language and meaning and how we construct both in tandem with the world around us is because community is *precisely* the thing which makes meaning possible in language in the first place. I mean this quite simply and literally: the accepted meaning of words is always decided *consensually*. The key point here is that we are, right now, actively designing the community that will come to form the core of status. If we can design it following the principles of openness, generosity, encouragement, responsibility, and grace then it becomes possible to make a kind of language from that community which will then ultimtely frame the things we are capable of thinking about, implementing and achieving.

As a young, naive and deeply idealistic 4th year student, I wrote a thesis that claimed that in using language, the aim should be to emphasise the community which invests it with meaning. If we do so, we can presumably overcome the contemporary tendency toward excessive focus on the individual and find better ways to orgainse ourselves and share our stories, in all the multi-faceted complexity that defines life (and meaning) within any community. When we use language that is self-reflexively focussed on the community which invests it with meaning, we can generate these deeply profound interactions that are able, perhaps, to skirt the violence any description necessarily involves (because it is always partial, always only a part of the whole it seeks in vain to capture) and thereby express something new and essential about what it is we're trying to build.

I have had any number of discussions with members of our nascent Ethereum community about ways to make a new language capable of describing the sort of world that the people responsible for making, developing, and maintaining these distributed networks envision. However, it is no more than a useful thought experiment to come up with the principles upon which any new natural language might operate because such a language cannot be implemented from on high. Language is a natural phenomenon, something that grows with use and adoption from the bottom up rather than the top down. So, it follows that if we want a new language to describe the sort of future we have all at some point caught a glimpse of, then we need to make it together as a community. It is one thing to write a bunch of code and post it on an obscure mailing list (and what a thing it was!), but it is entirely another to develop a consenually-arrived-at way of describing what all that code does in a way that is acceptable and understandable to a large portion of humanity. 

Meaning is derived consensually, language arises from specific interactions. So, we need to both make sure that the kinds of interactions we have with our fellow community members reflect the vision of a distributed network of peers spread across the world, working together for the betterment of the people around them AND that we are able to include as many people as we can in deciding exactly what this all means for everyone. Be kind, be generous, be gracious. Be open-minded. Buddha once said that, in the end, only three things matter: how gently you lived, how much you loved, and how gracefully you let go of things not meant for you. Let go of the hype, love the crazy technology we're making, and go gently into the world because we cannot change other people's behaviour or views, nor save anyone [but ourselves](http://peacefulrivers.homestead.com/maryoliver.html). We can only act in a way consistent with our own beliefs and, by doing so, encourage others to do the same.  

The key to this (as I hope you have realised by now) lies with the ways we, as a community, choose to express ourselves. If we want to secure a more equitable future in which the barriers to access any given system are as low as possible and the ability to innovate requires no permission and can be done by people who are not necessarily experts in that particular field, then it will require the sort of community of individuals capable and willing to pitch in not only with their specific expertise, but their personalities and quirks and passions and loves and hates and sadnesses and failures and successes if we will ever be able to produce a robust and lasting way of describing the sorts of possible worlds we can, at the moment, just barely glimpse. And, if we can find communal ways of describing those possible worlds and stories in a manner intelligble to other people, then it will be relatively trivial to implement such descriptions. I'll end with a lovely quote from a South African writer called Jonny Steinberg:

“Perhaps, in the end, that was Hermann’s gift to Lusikisiki [...] people who had come to see, through the potency of their own deeds, that the horizon of the possible stretched further than they had ever imagined” (*Three Letter Plague*, 328). This is primarily what Steinberg’s work, and this article, are aimed at expressing: just how potent anyone’s own deeds can be in terms of designing the ways in which we read and translate 'the truth’ of what this community is building.

Join us! We cannot make a better world with you.
